---
layout: post
title: in the image of
subtitle: narcissus
---

For this project, I want to explore the connections between people and technology, but more specifically our automation, AI, and algorithms. These are all things that we create, and created work is highly informed by its creators. I believe the things we create very much reflect who we are, and I think that once we've created something, our relationship with it is two-fold. Our reflection in a mirror is not just something we passively observe; we identify things about ourselves that we like, things that we would like to change, things that we think are ugly. And so we also work to "change" our image in the reflection so we can see what we want to see. So we change ourselves because of what we learn about ourselves, which also changes what we are observing. 

I think this is can get a bit circular, but I think this is especially relevant to the technologies of AI, algorithms, and automation. These are all things we create deliberately in the image of ourselves. Automation are things we create to physically do things better than we currently do them. AI is artifical intelligence; things we create to replicate the very human ability to find patterns in things. Algorithms streamline our human actions into processes that can be replicated. These are all very "human" technologies; technologies we've created in the image of ourselves.

I mentioned last time that I wanted to draw something, creating a more "traditional" piece of art. I wanted it to speak for itself, so it wouldn't be the process of creating the art that was interesting about it, but moreso what you saw at face value. 
