---
layout: post
title: tuning in, tuning out
subtitle: it's all just noise, man
---
A numbers station is a shortwave radio station used to broadcast encrypted or codified information via formatted numbers over large areas, or long distances. Mendi and Keith Obadike's [_Numbers Series_](http://obadike.squarespace.com/#/numbers-station-series/) makes use of the radio format to sonify data generated from NYPD Stop and Frisk data, from lynching dates contained in Ida B. Wells' _The Red Record_, and from 18th and 19th century slave ship manifests. For each performance, the source of the data is the sole context for the two readers sitting at at a table, reading off numbers into a microphone as mapped digital tones provide background noise. 

It's a difficult performance to engage with. The sonic backdrop to each performance is comprised of sounds reminiscent of microphone feedback or dial tones, sounds that typically encourage us to do everything in our power to make them stop. In the foreground is the even, monotone voices of the Obadikes alternating readings of numbers. Visually, the installation at the Ryan Lee Gallery is sparse. It's a room with white walls, the Obadikes seated across from each other at a table bearing only the equipment they'd need to broadcast over shortwave radio, the lists of formatted numbers, and a reading light. There is no seating for the audience, who crowds along the walls of the room. The overall effect is closest to a more intense version of experiences most often associated with waiting rooms at the DMV, complete with a budding headache, a sense of discomfort, and itch of impatience. But this is the feeling the Obadike's are exploring, are coming to terms with, are forcing their audience to confront. 

What is the source of this headache, discomfort, this impatience? At its core, the Obadike's performance, along with any frustrating visits to the DMV, is unsettling because of how dehumanizing the experience is. Something in us protests at the idea of people being flattened into a number: a resistance towards being made unsympathetic and cold, individually insignificant, just another member of an infinite set. But perhaps most critically, the feeling stems from the fact that it is two people acting with the capacity of machines. _Numbers Station_ is not given the voice of a Siri or an Alexa, not given the voice of a computer attempting humanness. It is given the very human voices of the Obadikes simulating that of an unflinching machine. We do not expect our computers to understand our experiences, but we all hope that other people will express empathy towards us, especially towards our most traumatizing moments. Here, the context of the data hits in full force. These are not just any randomly generated sequence of numbers: these are numbers into which are encoded unquantifiable amounts of human pain, inflicted on people by other people. 

Nobody wants to be a statistic, a single data point among many others. And yet, this is how our society processes Stop and Frisk numbers, lynchings, slaves. Our response to these subjects is not dissimilar to the one we exhibit towards the harsh noises the Obadikes map to each number; we want to stop listening, and if we can't do that, we want to tune out enough so that its relegated to an unfortunate drone in the background. 

Numbers stations have largely been comprised of people communicating to other people in the way typical of machines communicating to other machines. It is communication through formatted numbers, each representing the abstraction of a human event. It takes out the immediate and raw pain of an event; the numbers are numbing. But the numbers stations also perform the critical role of broadcasting to a large audience, and ultimately, it is up to the listeners whether to tune in or tune out.

