---
layout: post
title: mirror, mirror, on the wall,
subtitle: who am i? 
---
## Technology Telling us Who We Are
This is uncomfortable. I don't want to be defined by generalities, or by the categories I fit into. Many stereotypes hurt because we are being judged without having someone assess our actual character. It makes us feel cheap, and blurs our own sense of identity. The way machine learning directs our algorithms simply implements this on a mass scale. It looks for patterns, overarching stereotypes and statistical majorities and stamps that as a True Pattern of The Universe. So it must be objective and true. The numbers said so. 

Of course to process massive quantities of information, everybody is just shrunk down to a statistical point, one amongst billions. There is not enough time or capacity to see everyone as a person, so we become abstractions of ourselves. Some embrace judgment, because they know they will be judged favorably. They believe in the system and the values it is defined by. Others, historically betrayed by this overarching system, would rightfully be more wary.

Who defines good and bad? What does good and bad mean? These questions are important, though they can be headaches to think about. A social credit score in China means someone is keeping track of your value as a person. Someone is defining (or perhaps redefining) what it means to be good or bad not just in their own eyes, but in the eyes of a nation. Whether you buy into the system or not does not matter if everyone else around you is functioning off of that system. 

But it's easier this way. Many religions define a good and a bad, and people go to great lengths, some waging holy wars to defend that definition. Because that definition of good and bad gives a sense of identity. It is an internal compass in that it gives you a direction, and orients you in the world. Nobody wants their world turned upside down. It is easier when things are rigid, when there are rules to follow and directions that mean something. 

Easier. More convenient. It seems that technology trends towards making our lives easier and more convenient. And implementation of a de facto sense of "good" and "bad" would certainly make it clear who the "good" and "bad" people are. It would easily tell you how much you were worth, as a person, in the eyes of society, and maybe to yourself. But instead of through a lens of religion, of personal belief, it would be through a lens of "objectivity" and "science", which is supposed to be different from religion, somehow grounded in tangible facts. If religions are given power by their miracles, science and technology have power because they are "grounded in reality". But is this ethical system any different from a religion in its implentation? It simply forms a system of belief, but is more dangerous because it appears to remove cause for doubt. Math and the sciences are taught to us as Laws of the Universe, whereas religions need a foundation of belief for intangible things. A social credit system attempts to make an intangible thing seem tangible, though really we are taking abstractions and approximations of tangible things to define an intangible thing. It really is not so different here. It is important that when people decide to subscribe into (or when a country decides to subscribe into) a system that defines a person's worth, that they know that it is a decision, and not an immutable Law of the Universe.

## Using Technology to Find Ourselves
I'm mainly going to be using this as a sort of "brain-dump" space for a motivating project idea/question/concept that I'd like to explore.

The television show _Black Mirror_ uses the idea of a phone screen as a "black mirror", a play on technology showing us who we are, most generally as a darker view of humans through the lens of technology. In practice, we construct algorithms and AI to find patterns, a trait generally associated with human intelligence. We put a facet of ourselves on social media, constructing and curating images of ourselves on Facebook and Instagram, bursts of thoughts on Twitter, moments of our lives on YouTube, and so on, all to be shared with the world, or our own communities. We create machines to do human jobs faster and tirelessly. 

Creation is an action that can be interpreted to tell us something about its creators. What does technology and our interactions with it say about who we are? This is a question I am interested in exploring. I want this project to feel more personal. I'd like to draw or paint something for the class, and am also interested in the idea of a collage of some sort. I want to create something visual. Through a lens of technology, who am I? How do my interactions with technology change how I perceive myself? 

Often when I take pictures of things I draw, I notice that the angle at which I take the picture can pretty dramatically change how I see the image. I'm interested in doing a series of "interpretations": having a source image, drawing that, then taking a picture of that and then drawing that image, repeating this cycle a few times. I wonder how the original image would change between takes, both because it has been captured from a certain perspective by the camera, and in another perspective by myself. This sort of goes back to the idea of perspectives and data that we explored earlier on in the semester. 
