---
layout: post
title: manifest destiny
subtitle: home of the free
---
In _Stealth Infrastructure_, Julian Oliver worries that the opacity of how we receive our data allows for unwanted eyes poring over our every internet move.

But why should I value privacy, if I have nothing to hide? Why would I worry about others collecting data about me? 

Chess is one of our oldest games, a 32 piece simulation of war. If we can play one, two, three steps ahead of our opponents, we control the board to win the game. Modern warfare and political diplomacy rests on the informational leverage you have over your adversaries. Knowledge is power. And what else is power used for, if not to control? Our advances in scientific theory and engineering masterpieces seem to demonstrate a mastery of the laws of the natural world, because now we _know_ the world around us. After all, we went to the moon, didn't we? 

In _The Internet With a Human Face_, Maciej Ceglowski warns that any collection of data opens us to abuses from those who hold our data. He notes that most people are afraid of the government knowing our data, but are somehow okay with large private companies holding our data for us in the first place. Somehow, we seem to have placed our trust with them. Ceglowski convincingly argues that this trust is misplaced.

It's not as if these large private companies are not exerting control over us already. In fact, the goal is to control the market. When you have data, you can target ads. You can target the content itself. Maybe it's personalization, but maybe they're steering us in a direction by selectively showing us what they want us to see. 

So what? It's not harmful, is it? I still feel like I'm a good person, and I engage with this supposed "control" daily. Besides, this trend of data collection is good. The more we know about ourselves, the more of our problems we can solve. Maybe the data will answer some of our big questions. After all, the numbers don't lie. Our knowledge of numbers got us to the moon, after all. The data is just helping us fulfill our god-given right to the universe. 

But what about free will? What about the freedom to think, to develop diverse and independent ideas? What about the beauty of discovery and the struggle to learn, the payoff of working hard to understand something? Maybe having our worldviews spoon fed to us is convenient, but aren't we losing so much of our appreciation of the world when our only goal is to make it bend to our will? Aren't we losing the beauty of independent thoughts when we have an algorithm give us the content we should think about? 

There's a fine line when it comes to love. You can admire a wildflower in the wild, or you can pick the flower and put it in a vase to make it yours. Eventually, it won't be yours. Or maybe the flower will live forever, and it won't be so special, just another part of your backdrop. But you can always pick more flowers. Add something new to your collection. When do all the flowers start looking the same? When is it hard to delineate between your different flowers? When will there no longer be any new flowers growing, since you've captured all of them? 

Freedom is a beautiful thing. Maybe we don't want a procedural system telling us it knows us better than we know ourselves. Maybe part of the beauty is discovering who we are ourselves, instead of being told who we are. It's human to want to feel like you are yourself entirely. Otherwise we are just puppets on a string, dancing to someone elses' tune, thinking we are all doing everything ourselves. 

Isn't it too much hubris to play divine power? This is a path of self-discovery, not a path of command and conquer. What are you going to do with all that power anyway? Isn't it too much to say that you know what's best for everyone? 

I never knew how important it would be to push for decentralization, to push for transparency in our systems. We can't answer to systems that work with powers unbeknownst to us. It would be handing over the controls. It would be a defeat for free thought. The internet is an incredible tool and opportunity for us to learn more about the world around us. It has the capacity to become a weapon of control over many for a select few. We cannot let that happen. 

The internet is an American invention. In the American spirit, if we believe all men are born equal, with the same unalienable rights to their own lives, liberties, and pursuits of happiness, we need to keep the internet decentralized, and everyone's data should only be their own. 

