---
layout: post
title: Making Numbers Less Numb
subtitle: frequencies of feelings
---

What was the project that you were responding to, and how did you think about how to approach doing this? What did you end up with as a final piece? In which ways is your piece different from the original, and which aspects were you focused on changing or replicating? 

Previously, I wrote about _Numbers Station_, a sound and performance art piece created by Mendi and Keith Obadike. In the interest of extending my own appreciation for creating that style of art, I interacted with a dataset intending to emulate the style of _Numbers Station_ (though to admittedly disappointing results).

### _Style_
_Numbers Station_ was a piece that employed both sound and live performance to represent a dataset, and in doing so, engaged its audience with the subject matter of the dataset. It was designed to evoke thoughts and feelings, to inspire metaphors and perhaps a deeper understanding or connection with the data represented. Though there is a nontrivial performance aspect, the primary catalyst for the "evoking of emotion" is sound: the voices of the Obadike's accompanied by ambient tones are the focal point of the piece. It's also worth noting that the only thing explicitly given about their piece is the context for the data; they don't tell you what you should be feeling. In this way, there is a very abstract element that is core to the style.  

To me, emulating the style of _Numbers Station_ would mean creating a sound piece around a dataset that would evoke thoughts, emotions, and feelings in its audience that would help them process it. Furthermore, the sounds should speak for the data, without needing overt signaling to guide the audience to a conclusion. 

### _Picking a Dataset_

_Numbers Station_ is centered around data from atrocities committed against the black community. This is a weighty dataset; it comes from topics that Americans have deeply struggled with since their nation's inception. Due to this, it lends itself well to being represented emotionally through sound. 

To elaborate on this, there's a sort of universality to the emotions of sound and music: for example, people will generally respond that a major scale sounds "happy", while a minor scale sounds "sad" though there is nothing inherently "sad" or "happy" about the sequences of notes. This idea is also reflected in a lot of the music we create and listen to. If someone has recently gone through a breakup, they have myriad songs about heartbreak to choose from that will resonate with their strong, already-present emotions. Soundtracks in movies and television are crucial to setting the mood or tone of a scene. Personally, I find that music can help me process emotions that I had difficulty grappling with, and I don't imagine that's a very unique experience. It is this property of sound that the Obadike's are capitalizing on. Since the context of their data comes charged with emotion, sound lends itself well to helping people process those emotions.

With all this in mind, I wanted to pick a so-called "weighty" dataset. However, I did have a personal constraint: I have no prior experience creating sound pieces. Thus, I did not want to pick a dataset from something too emotional or personal. I am not confident that I could do it justice with my lack of sonic experience and ability, and the last thing I would want to do would be to disrespect the data (but really the people for which the data encodes strong emotions). But I did want it to have some sort of weight, otherwise there would be slim chances of evoking any emotion of the dataset at all. 

I chose to use the live data from the [US Debt Clock](http://usdebtclock.org/). Whenever I see the debt clock, I feel overwhelmed, mildly anxious. There's some mild panic beginning to form, because it's never fun to see a massive bright red number increasing steadily, especially when that massive red number is called "debt". Importantly, this live data made me feel _something_, which is what I was looking for in a dataset.

### _What to do with all this data?_
Now comes the business of actually creating a sound piece around the dataset. 

One of my initial ideas was to work with the "debt per citizen" and "debt per income-taxpayer" statistics, since this could help make the data feel more personal to its audience. Every $1 dollar increase in the "debt per citizen" corresponds to (approximately) a $330,000,000 (!!!) increase in the national debt. Since the national debt increases by $100,000 every 4.5 seconds, it would take around 4 hours 7 minutes and 30 seconds to see the "debt per citizen" go up by a dollar. Similarly, every $1 dollar increase in the "debt per income-taxpayer" corresponds to (approximately) a $120,000,000 increase in the national debt. This statistic goes up by a dollar every 1.5 hours. Though they are kind of jarring facts once the calculations are done, the calculations are hard to convey through abstract sound. Other than explicitly stating these facts (in words), I wasn't sure how to convey the emotion of this data. I briefly considered making this a performance piece, in which every 4.5 seconds, a dot would be drawn on a piece of paper. After 1200 dots had been drawn, the debt per income-taxpayer will have gone up by a dollar. I'd hate to make anyone (including myself) sit and draw dots every 4.5 seconds (which is a pretty stressful activity in itself) for an hour and a half, and all to represent only $1, so I nixed this idea. After more deliberation, I decided to look elsewhere.

The concept behind my final piece is pretty simple. The emotions engendered by the national debt statistic of the debt clock are in the vein of "overwhelmed", "anxious", and "mildly panicked". What induces this emotion is the rapidly increasing national debt number. Therefore, I would map a repeating sound to every $10,000 increase, and it would sound not entirely unlike an alarm. Perhaps for the first 3 seconds it would sound benign, but for any amount of time after it would seem increasingly annoying. Further, I'd map another repeating tone to every $10,000 increase in the federal tax revenue (since this is the money that the government would use to "pay off" the debt). These come fewer and further between, so perhaps it'd be something to look forward to hearing. 

In _Numbers Station_, the Obadikes read out numbers, which gives the audience something to attribute the sounds to. I was not planning on reading out any of the constantly and rapidly increasing numbers (which my dataset was comprised of). I also didn't see any sense in reading out random numbers, as those don't actually represent anything. I thought to give the visuals of the debt clock, but without the overlay providing information for what each of the numbers are and mean. This way, there was more of an abstractness to the data, similar to _Numbers Station_. The audience would only know the context for the data, but not what each piece of data meant. Plus, the numbers are pretty overwhelming by themselves, so I thought that would also help my cause. For those who were determined, they could eventually map the sounds back to the increasing metric. 




