---
layout: post
title: let there be light!
subtitle: silent trees, shadow puppets
---
If all data is interpreted, as Kurgan (and some of you) say, what are datasets really tell us? How do we know when and how we can trust a dataset, and is there a standard rule for this?
What are the different types of truth that a dataset can have? Can data reflect a number of different realities at once?

If a tree falls in a forest but no one is around to hear it, does it make a sound?

If a set of numbers has no meaningful interpretation to anyone, is it still data?

The way we interact with the world around us, with our personal realities, is largely dependent on how and what we perceive. The information we receive from our senses shapes our realities, and what is a dataset if not a captured perception? 

In Plato's _Allegory of the Cave_, a group of people are raised in a cave, with only an unseen fire casting shadows of the outside world on the back of a cave wall. This is all they are allowed to perceive; this is their reality. Their personal datasets, received from all of their senses, tell them that this is what the world is: flickering shadows. A rabbit would be only the shadow of a rabbit. All of their data said so. They have no reason to believe otherwise. If one were taken out of the cave, the new light, new perspective, would be blinding, and there would be a serious update to their datasets. Their entire take on reality would change. 

So how do we know when and how we can trust anything we perceive? It always comes down to a decision. The standard rule for this is your own best judgment. The more informed you are about the dataset's context, the larger your dataset, the more confidence you can place in your ability to interpret the information you have. Do you know what your light source is? Where it comes from? 

To trust a dataset, do you trust where the data comes from? Do you share a common understanding with the data? Do you know how the data was collected? Do you trust that the data being shown is not altered? There is no standard rule. As with all other actions in life, a decision must be made.

A dataset can reflect any number of truths. Suppose a dataset represents an idea. Plato has a theory of forms, and absolutely can reflect a number of different realities at once. The data does not come from an impossible perspective, even though it may try to simulate one. Even if it did, the data is of no use to us until someone looks at it. In this case, when the tree falls in the forest and no one is there to hear it fall, we really can't ever be sure that there was a sound. To even attempt to reflect reality, data must be looked at from a perspective. A mountain must be looked at from a perspective, and may look very different from one point of view to another. A mid-sized novel may look a daunting task to someone who has just learned to read, but to a college student, may look like a quiet night of reading. Of course data can represent any number of realities. 
