---
layout: post
title: Checkpoint
subtitle: looking backwards and forwards from right here, right now
---
It's the start of a new year, which is as good a time as any to do some personal reflection and resolution setting.

Tangentially, today is the 6th day of the year, so there are 360 days after this one until the next year. This is a rather arbitrary designation: who cares whether there are 360 or 361 days left, or whether or not we are 6 days rather than 5 days into the year we've collectively decided to call "2020"? It is one of those special years that's a full day longer than the majority of other years, too, but what's another 24 hours, give or take? Anyhow, 360 is a rather nice number. It's factorization is 2<sup>3</sup> x 3<sup>2</sup> x 5<sup>1</sup>, giving it some aesthetic appeal: it's made up of 3 multiples of the first prime number, 2 of the second, and 1 of the third. Moreover, it's the number of degrees in a full rotation, giving the impression that it's a round sort of number-- circular in quality, without edges. Friendly, benign (that's how I feel about circles, anyway). At midnight tonight, we'll be 1/60th of the way into the year: repeat the number of hours in the last 6 days 60 times and the year will be over.

Back to the task at hand, the goal of this current checkpoint (and most checkpoints, probably) is to locate myself in the present.

## Looking Back
This year was mostly split into three (unequal) parts, each designated by my physical location. The first part was spent studying math abroad in Budapest, the middle part spent working in Shenzhen, and the last part spent completing the first half of my final year at Olin. Sandwiching each part (like the bread in a Big Mac) are trips back home to Northern Virginia.

### Budapest
I think more than any other experience I've had away from family (e.g. being at school, summer internships), living in Budapest gave me a sense of independence. Paying my monthly rent and utilities, being fully responsible for feeding myself (buying groceries and cooking, as opposed to walking myself to a dining hall), planning trips, overall budgeting of my time and money, and learning to navigate a new place with norms unfamiliar to me (language, city life) probably all contributed to this feeling. This all came to me as an incredible relief: it turns out that I do pretty well on my own. I enjoy riding public transportation and walking around the city. Contrary to prior belief, I don't dislike running; I enjoy exploring local parks and going for a jog. Cooking is a relaxing activity that feels a little like performing magic. One of my favorite universal (global?) experiences is buying food in markets and grocery stores: seeing the stacks on stacks of local produce, the different brands of cans and bags and boxes. And it's comforting to live in a city, constantly surrounded by the presence of other people going about their own lives.

Budapest is beautiful and alive. The public transportation system is comprehensive, and the city is not so crowded (even during the tourist seasons) that it gets claustrophobic. There are many public parks and spaces, great for running: Bikas Park, the path along the river from Szent Gellert ter to Kossuth Lajos ter, and Margit Island were particularly nice, not to mention City Park, the Citadella, or Kospaszi. Hungarian food is delicious and filling, from meggyleves and kurtoskalacs to the ever popular goulash, csirke paprikas, and palacsinta. I don't think I'll ever stop missing the pitas from Hummus Bar and Hari Kebab, or the turo rudi and Pilota cookies.

In other ways, it was isolating. I spent the vast majority of my time alone, thinking about and working on my math assignments. My Hungarian is also lacking: I can't say too much beyond basic greetings and asking for help in a grocery store, or ordering off a menu. Not that I'd typically go up to strangers and converse with them anyways, but being surrounded by a language that I couldn't engage with fluently made certain aspects of everyday living less accessible. I had a hard time finding a balance between immersing myself in Budapest and concentrating on mathematics, especially because the math was really challenging for me.

I love math more than I did before. Math is still more engaging for me than any other subject I've encountered, and piecing together a proof is still an unparalleled feeling. But I spent enough time alone, in part because of math, that moving forward I absolutely need to work on communicating (and thus giving a defined form to) the thoughts I have rolling around in my head. Otherwise it's too easy for them to mutate into something else.

> _"Almost anything carried to its logical extreme becomes depressing, if not carcinogenic."_
> <div style="text-align: right">Ursula K. Le Guin</div>

 In mathematics, I follow a logical path to its end (and perhaps extreme) to arrive at the result that completes it (in the way of completeness, the result is often satisfying and beautiful). This way of thinking bled over into how I started to think about non-mathematical things. The logic and structures are well-defined in mathematics; they are by our design. In most other cases, this is not true. Thankfully, what looks like the logical conclusion of a path observed from the present is generally not the actual course that life follows: things are messy, with any number of causes both apparent and hidden, and are often in flux with no easily discernible pattern, if there is one at all.

### Shenzhen
During my summer in China, I reconnected with things that I'd become distant from. These range from the obvious to the surprising: from refamiliarizing myself with the Chinese language and my heritage, to reaffirming the merits of project-based engineering and my love for reading.

Shenzhen was hot and incredibly humid, ripe with mosquitoes, and my work experience there was just finding its feet in an ambitious first-time run of a project-based engineering camp. It was also green and lush, and once again, incredibly alive. The streets were packed at all times, and there was infinitely more to eat and buy than anywhere else I had been. I was introduced to novel and ubiquitous uses of the smartphone, and the underlying feeling that technology was transformative at a scale I could barely begin to comprehend in China (one example of this would be the new Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macau bridge, spanning 55km across the Pearl River Delta; another would be the omnipresence of WeChat). There was a feeling of relentless progress occurring in Shenzhen, perhaps due in part to it being a technological hub, as well as a recent success in economic development: the entire area had emerged from a small fishing village in just 40 years.

The general sentiment did specifically feel like progress, rather than general change. Many of the people I spoke with (in the university, in taxis, in massage parlors, in tea shops, on boats) seemed hopeful, with this hope placed in the policies of the Chinese government and in the thriving technological scene. Meanwhile, the protests in Hong Kong were rolling to a boil (erupting just as I left China to go back home). From my outside perspective, it's always hard for me to believe that such rapid change doesn't leave many (and in the case of China, millions) behind, or that this rapid progression doesn't occur at some greater social cost. Still, if outlook is a choice, technological pessimism feels increasingly like a masochistic exercise. Striking a balance between cautious skepticism and general optimism is an ongoing challenge.

Seeing my grandparents helps me to understand how the Grinch felt when his heart grew three sizes in one day. Seeing their passion for life and their love for other people through performed action is inspiring and heart-warming. They highlight the importance of maintaining interpersonal bonds, and generally being a good friend, neighbor, family member, and fellow human for me, but what they mean to me is much more concrete and unfailingly makes me emotional.

I started reading again in earnest, getting through 8 books during my stay. I read more New Yorker articles, kept up with Pitchfork, read contemporary novels, classics, and nonfiction, building an ongoing resolution to read more books.

### Olin
This semester I took classes required towards graduation, which was a smooth ride, since I have a better sense of my own interests and abilities. I continued to read, adding an additional 9 books, this time spanning modern love and historical romance novels, nonfiction, and personal essays and memoirs. Post-graduation looms, but I have a better idea of how to leverage the resources available to me at school towards my own personal goals. Surprisingly (or maybe not), I can't find too much to say about this semester: I did my work in a way such that I could be proud of my contributions, I attended all my classes and tried to expand my knowledge base, and I didn't find all that much time for personal reflection. I just worked my routine.

Well, there were a few departures from routine. I went to three concerts: I watched Aries perform at Sonia in Cambridge, which made me feel oddly like a proud parent (and also reminded me of how awkward it can be to have a distant digital friendship); I went to the Mat Kerekes show in Allston, which was exceedingly lovely; and I went to the Halloween Sum 41 show in Worcester, where I enjoyed the energy of the metalcore openers more than the main event. I went on a personal trip to go see the fall foliage in the White Mountains, and before that went on the school camping trip in the same place, hiking to the top of Mount Crawford. There was a trip to Arizona for a course that was my first experience at a professional conference.

Even with these events, equilibrium was easy to maintain, and time passed steadily.

## Looking Ahead
As mentioned, I have a few goals moving forward.
- To write more, whether in the form of a blog post, journal entry, essay, or otherwise.
- To strengthen my connections with other people through action. Making a few more cards this year, and keeping up correspondences: asking people how they are and letting them know how I'm doing.
- To step further away from social media and instantly gratifying things. I don't think it's appropriate for me to completely forgo social media, as its too influential a force to ignore, but I think it would be healthy for me to distance myself with that venue of communication.
- To continue to read more books and writings.
